feat: openapi typescript client (#2885)
Redocly/redocly-cli: docs/@v2/configuration/reference/client.md

> # `client`

Reviewer: maybe we should rename it to `codegen` as well as the command?

Author: Why do you think codegen is a better fit? At the beginning, I was considering this name but decided to go with "client". "Codegen" names the mechanism, not the product.
Also because of CLI's verb family: generate-client, generate-arazzo, generate-spec ...
There were other thoughts, but I do not remember them 😄

Reviewer: Let's go with client for now

## Introduction

The `client` configuration provides settings for the [`generate-client`](../../commands/generate-client.md) command.
The block can be used at the root of the configuration file, where it holds shared defaults, and inside an [API-specific section](./apis.md) (`apis.<name>.client`), where it overrides the root block field by field.

The input and output are not part of the `client` block:

- **input** — `apis.<name>.root`, or a path or alias passed on the command line.
- **output** — `apis.<name>.clientOutput`; when omitted it defaults to `<name>.client.ts` next to the configuration file. The `--output` flag overrides it for single-API invocations.

## Options

Each scalar option mirrors the matching CLI flag and shares its default — see the [command options](../../commands/generate-client.md#options) for the full description of each value.

> The `pagination` option is config-only and has no flag.

Reviewer: it can have a flat too for consistency which can accept a json string

Author: The real rule looks like this 
```
--pagination '{"style":"cursor","cursorParam":"after","nextCursor":"/page/endCursor","hasMore":"/page/hasNextPage","limitParam":"limit","items":"/items"}'
```

btw, I've updated docs a bit

`The pagination option is config-only — a structured, durable contract that belongs in versioned configuration rather than a shell string. For runs without a config file, declare pagination per operation with the x-pagination extension in the description, or pass pagination to the programmatic generateClient(...).`

but I'd keep pagination config-only. Every existing flag mirrors a scalar value; pagination is a nested structure (convention rule + per-operation overrides + exclude), so a --pagination JSON string would actually be the CLI's first JSON-blob flag — hard to write (shell/CI escaping), impossible to comment, and painful to review. It's also a durable per-API contract, which belongs in versioned config. For runs without a config file there are already two paths: the x-pagination extension declares pagination per operation inside the description itself, and the programmatic generateClient({ pagination }) accepts it directly.

Author: done https://github.com/Redocly/redocly-cli/pull/2885/changes/e9c8e7bd7dc8497b7e65360a37bdbb4742a09d16

| `mockData`       | `string`                                | Data mode for the `mock` generator: `baked` or `faker`.                                                                                                                  |
| `mockSeed`       | `number`                                | Seed for `faker`-mode mocks.                                                                                                                                             |
| `serverUrl`      | `string`                                | Server URL baked into the client; defaults to `servers[0].url`.                                                                                                          |
| `setup`          | `string`                                | Path to a publisher setup module baked into the client.                                                                                                                  |
| `pagination`     | [Pagination object](#pagination-object) | Declares how the API paginates, so paginated operations gain typed `.pages()`/`.items()` async iterators.                                                                |

### Pagination object

> The `pagination` block is an optional convention rule (the rule fields below, applied to every operation it structurally fits when `style` is set), plus per-operation `operations` overrides and an `exclude` list.

Reviewer: I think this is very complex and yet will not cover many cases.

I think we can keep it but for more complex cases (e.g. cursor in the response headers like [github](https://docs.github.com/en/rest/using-the-rest-api/using-pagination-in-the-rest-api?apiVersion=2026-03-10#using-link-headers)) we may want to have some extension where user can write a piece of code.
can be done later I think

We may also support the link header by default somehow if it's documented in the spec

Author: Agree on both counts
For arbitrary shapes I'd hold off on a code extension point: the documented hand-written-helper pattern (see the custom-pagination example) already covers them fully typed in ~10 lines, without new baking/runtime machinery.

Author: done https://github.com/Redocly/redocly-cli/pull/2885/changes/344f08e3a42d4933d44663e11a899cb987f9dac8

| `items`       | `string`                  | **REQUIRED**. JSON pointer to the page's item array in the response.                                                                                                         |
| `exclude`     | `[string]`                | operationIds that no source may paginate; wins over overrides, extensions, and the convention.                                                                               |
| `operations`  | map of operationId → rule | Per-operation rules taking the same fields as the convention; each entry beats the spec's `x-pagination` and the convention.                                                 |

The rules are verified at generate time: the advance parameter must be a declared query parameter of the right type (string for `cursor`, numeric for `offset` and `page`), and the JSON pointers must resolve in the operation's JSON success-response schema, with `items` landing on an array and `hasMore` on a boolean.
A convention that doesn't fit an operation skips it; an explicit rule that doesn't fit fails generation.

> The `x-pagination` operation extension in the API description takes the same rule fields.

Reviewer: this name is too generic, I would not use it, maybe x-redoclyClientPagination or something similar
We may hit some conflicts

Reviewer: @Marshevskyy I think we need to adjust this one

Author: agreed, will do

Author: done
I used x-redocly-pagination rather than x-redoclyClientPagination, kebab-case matches the repo's multi-word extension style (x-api-key, x-security-scheme-*) and dropping "Client" keeps the extension reusable by other Redocly tooling later

# `client`

## Introduction

The `client` configuration provides settings for the [`generate-client`](../../commands/generate-client.md) command.

> The block can be used at the root of the configuration file, where it holds shared defaults, and inside an [API-specific section](./apis.md) (`apis.<name>.client`), where it overrides the root block field by field.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The block can be used at the root of the configuration file, where it holds defaults, and inside an [API-specific section](./apis.md) (`apis.<name>.client`), where it overrides the root block for the specific api.
```

See https://github.com/Redocly/redocly-cli/pull/2885/changes#r3666819715.

# `client`

## Introduction

The [`generate-client`](../../commands/generate-client.md) command reads its settings from `redocly.yaml`: a top-level `client` block holds shared defaults, and each API under `apis:` supplies its input (`root`), an optional output (`clientOutput`), and any per-API overrides under `apis.<name>.client`.

```yaml
# redocly.yaml
client: # shared defaults for every generated client
  generators:
    - sdk
  argsStyle: flat
apis:
  cafe:
    root: ./openapi.yaml # the input

>     clientOutput: ./src/api/client.ts # optional; defaults to `cafe.client.ts`

Reviewer 2: How does it know the default?

Author: the default output filename is derived from the API's alias (the key under apis:). For the api aliased cafe, when clientOutput is omitted the client is written to <alias>.client.ts (i.e. cafe.client.ts) in the redocly.yaml directory. In the command that's fileNameFor(job.name) → `${name}.client.ts` where name is the alias.

Author: changed to clientOutput: ./src/api/client.ts # optional; defaults to `<api-name>.client.ts` (here `cafe.client.ts`), this  makes that explicit.

And the two container fields:

| Field        | Type                      | Description                                                                                |
| ------------ | ------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ |
| `exclude`    | `string[]`                | operationIds no source may paginate (wins over overrides, extensions, and the convention). |
| `operations` | map of operationId → rule | Per-operation rules; each entry beats the spec's `x-pagination` and the convention.        |

The style-conditional requirements and the structural fit (the advance param must be a declared query parameter of the right type; the pointers must resolve in the JSON success-response schema, `items` landing on an array) are verified at generate time: a convention that doesn't fit skips the operation, while an explicit rule that doesn't fit fails generation. The `x-pagination` operation extension in the spec takes the same rule fields; per operation, precedence is `operations[id]` > `x-pagination` > the convention.

## Precedence

> Settings resolve **top-level `client` → per-API `client` → CLI flags** (later wins). A plain file-path invocation ignores `apis:` and uses only the top-level `client`.

Reviewer 2: This section should be only about the config application. No need to mention the full resolution path as already have it [here](https://github.com/Redocly/redocly-cli/pull/2885/changes#r3551468839).

Author: corrected

# `client`

## Introduction

> The [`generate-client`](../../commands/generate-client.md) command reads its settings from `redocly.yaml`: a top-level `client` block holds shared defaults, and each API under `apis:` supplies its input (`root`), an optional output (`clientOutput`), and any per-API overrides under `apis.<name>.client`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The [`generate-client`](../../commands/generate-client.md) command reads its settings from `redocly.yaml`.
A top-level `client` block holds shared defaults.
Each API under `apis:` supplies the command's input (`root`), an optional output (`clientOutput`), and any per-API overrides under `apis.<name>.client`.
```

```yaml
# redocly.yaml
client: # shared defaults for every generated client
  generators:
    - sdk
  argsStyle: flat
apis:
  cafe:
    root: ./openapi.yaml # the input
    clientOutput: ./src/api/client.ts # optional; defaults to `<api-name>.client.ts` (here `cafe.client.ts`)
    client: # per-API overrides (optional)
      argsStyle: grouped
```

```sh
redocly generate-client              # builds every api with a `client` block or `clientOutput`
redocly generate-client cafe         # just the `cafe` api (its client block + clientOutput)
redocly generate-client --config ./config/redocly.yaml
```

## Options

> The same fields are accepted at the top level (shared defaults) and under `apis.<name>.client` (per-API overrides): `generators`, `argsStyle`, `serverUrl`, `outputMode` (`single` or `split`), `runtime`, `enumStyle`, `errorMode`, `dateType`, `queryFramework`, `mockData`, `mockSeed`, `setup`, and [`pagination`](#pagination). Each of the scalar fields mirrors the matching CLI flag — see the [command options](../../commands/generate-client.md#options) for what every field does; `pagination` is config-only (no flag).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The same fields are accepted at the top level (shared defaults) and under `apis.<name>.client` (per-API overrides): `generators`, `argsStyle`, `serverUrl`, `outputMode` (`single` or `split`), `runtime`, `enumStyle`, `errorMode`, `dateType`, `queryFramework`, `mockData`, `mockSeed`, `setup`, and [`pagination`](#pagination).
Each of the scalar fields mirrors the matching CLI flag — see the [command options](../../commands/generate-client.md#options) for what every field does.
The `pagination` field is config-only (no flag).
```

The input and output are **not** part of a `client` block:

- **input** — `apis.<name>.root` (or a path/alias passed on the command line).
- **output** — `apis.<name>.clientOutput`; when omitted it defaults to `<name>.client.ts` in the `redocly.yaml` directory. `--output` overrides it (single-API invocations only).

## Pagination

> `pagination` declares how the API paginates, so paginated operations gain typed `.pages()`/`.items()` async iterators (see [Pagination in the usage guide](../../guides/use-generated-client.md#pagination)). The block is an optional **convention rule** (the rule fields below, applied to every operation it structurally fits when `style` is set) plus per-operation `operations` overrides and an `exclude` list:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
`pagination` declares how the API paginates, so paginated operations gain typed `.pages()`/`.items()` async iterators (see [Pagination in the usage guide](../../guides/use-generated-client.md#pagination)).
The block is an optional **convention rule** (the rule fields below, applied to every operation it structurally fits when `style` is set) plus per-operation `operations` overrides and an `exclude` list:
```

| `generators`     | `[string]`                              | Generators to run, in order. Each entry is a built-in name (`sdk`, `zod`, `tanstack-query`, `swr`, `mock`, `transformers`) or a custom generator's path or package name. |
| `outputMode`     | `string`                                | File layout: `single` or `split`.                                                                                                                                        |
| `runtime`        | `string`                                | Runtime distribution: `inline` or `package`.                                                                                                                             |

> | `importExt`      | `string`                                | Extension in generated relative imports: `js` (default, for tsc and bundlers) or `ts` (for Node's built-in type stripping).                                              |

Reviewer 4: I don't have a strong opinion on this parameter name.
Does it make sense to use different naming, like `targetRuntime` or similar ?
So we could use `node` | `bundler` as values.

Reviewer 4: I’m also fine with the current name - I’m mainly wondering which option would be most immediately clear to users.

Author: We already ship runtime: inline | package. Having runtime and targetRuntime side by side in the same client block, meaning completely unrelated things, is a real confusion cost — "I set targetRuntime, do I still need runtime?"

Reviewer: I think it is relevant only for split mode so I would probably name it split-import-ext or something like that
